If customers of FinTech companies
are expected to rely at
least in part if
not in the whole on
the algorithms of
the technology of themselves,
what do we know about
how important trust is?
There's a substantial
amount of work
on trust in financial
markets and in
the financial advisory space
and that would include
in the insurance space,
in the real estate space,
and some of the related
spaces we talked
about as part of
these lectures that are
informative about
what we might be able
to conclude in
the case of FinTech.
Of course in FinTech,
we have a number of
other considerations
including the quality
of algorithms
and what the human machine
interface might look like.
Let us look next at some
of the evidence that has
accumulated by way of
research and anecdote.
Behavioralist and
psychologists tell us
that when human
see each other for
the first time or perhaps
see each other after
not having seen one another
for a period of time,
we quickly assess
attributes of safety
and competence very
rapidly and powerfully.
The first two principal
components if you
will of human interaction.
We can often think of levels of
trust construed along
these dimensions.
For example, trust in
technical competence.
So now, how do I trust that
you know what you're doing?
Second, especially important in
financial transactions and
financial service
and relationships,
trust and ethical conduct
and character.
Do I trust you not to
steal money from me?
Important of course
in an obvious way.
Third, trust in
the ability to be human,
trust and empathetic skills,
maturity, emotional intelligence.
If I tell you personal things
about myself or my family,
can I trust that you, an advisor,
will handle that well
and can provide counsel?
Many who are concerned
about FinTech crowding out
the traditional methodologies and
traditional relationships
in the advisory space
and elsewhere,
often highlight the last
component under the idea that
three million years of
human progress may not be
ultimately resulting
in an app by itself.
However, the open
question remains of,
what are the trade-offs
between or the interactions
between trust in
advisory services,
the kind of services
that FinTech providers
are actually
potentially providing,
and the clients need
to feel safety.
What builds trust?
Well traditionally,
we hear taking time
to explain products
and offerings and
recommendations; explaining fees,
staying up to date with
current products and trends,
responding quickly
to client needs.
Although, our research suggests
the financial services
industry over
emphasizes required frequency
of communication.
We studied this at
Wharton partnership with
State Street Global Advisors
a couple years ago.
We did a survey of thousands
of financial advisors
and their clients.
The kind of clients who might be
purchasers of FinTech
Services at some level,
at least from
a consumer perspective.
We asked what the most
important characteristic
of a financial advisor is.
Far and away, both advisors
and their clients which
who were matched,
indicated that trustworthiness of
the advisor was
the most important element.
Trustworthiness was at the
margin seen as more important
by advisors then clients but over
all the possibilities
for both of them,
trustworthiness was at the top.
Second understanding
the family's needs and goals.
Again, viewed slightly more
important by advisors
than by clients.
Quick efficient Folsom
communication seem more
important at the margin
by clients and
advisors and then performance.
Interestingly enough,
financial advisors viewed
performance as less
important than clients.
Finally, cost fees.
Advisors felt that fees
were not as important as
trustworthiness
which was inherent
in the client data as well,
but they thought it was
less important than clients
saw among other possible
answers as well.
So far and away,
the trustworthiness
of an advisor appears to
matter at the margin more
for advisors than clients
but for both
incredibly important.
An additional part of
the analysis looked at
the most important attributes of
the value proposition of
financial advisors
ranging from knowledge,
personal factors including
relationship factors,
communication styles
including proactiveness,
stability of the relationship,
transparency and
responsiveness for
clients being knowledgeable
was seen as most important.
Clearly important for
the FinTech industry is
the ability to
reflect and to carry
through knowledgeable
applications of
their art in their craft.
Responsiveness was seen as
the third most
important thing for
advisors followed by personal
factors including pedigree,
and history and tenure in
the profession not seen as
very important by clients.
Top for clients was knowledge,
second was responsiveness,
third was transparency.
Knowledge responsiveness
and transparency are
things that the FinTech
industry can lead with.
On the other hand,
financial advisors
thought that personal factors,
knowledge and responsiveness
were most important.
Once again areas in which
FinTech may have an advantage.
What do millennials think of it?
Well, in research specifically
focusing on the millennials,
when they were asked what
the most important
characteristics of advisors were.
Well, first the dependent
upon complexity
of the scenario or
the questions involved,
and second was ordered
in a manner that
was apparent from previous data
and previous comments
that we've made.
The millennials segment also has
specific attitudes
toward this idea
of knowledge, transparency,
and communication.
In some research published
in the Journal of
Financial Planning,
Johnson and Larson
reported results from
a survey of millennials on
the attributes of financial
advisors that were most
important and they dichotomized
under two scenarios.
One, where there is
a simple decision
to be made and a second
where the information
was complex and
the decision was complex.
I've highlighted the statistically
significant attributes
and the table is
sorted in descending
order of importance
attributes that were
rated most important.
By way of statistical
significance,
it was knowledge and
friendliness that dominated
and of course to
a lesser extent the
degree advanced training,
and so on were important.
In other words, one
instrumental and one
effective characteristic
of advisors.
Note that in a high
complexity scenario,
friendliness and
approachability which
we equate roughly with
safety was more important
than technical capacity.
For a low complexity
financial planning scenario,
again at more than the margin,
latest financial techniques and
models were rated most highly.
This gives insight into
some of the challenges of
FinTech when it's distinct
from the human element
highlighting the importance of
the bionic model in FinTech.
To summarize it in one more way,
when high complexity
scenarios were at stake,
the human element dominated when
low complexity scenarios
were at stake.
The technical element dominated
although they were both
important across the board.
In addition, Trust and Constant
Contact has been born
out as being highly
important across scenarios for
clients of financial
advisory firms.
Shmeiser and Hogarth,
a couple of years ago
found that financial
advice increases
financial well-being
broadly construed
by way of perception and
also has an influential effect
on financial behaviors
in a positive direction.
So financial advice
was important.
That seems like a predicate
in the FinTech world.
Second, trust was a function
of age and with
contact in particular.
These results which were
developed in an ongoing way
as recovery from
the financial crisis
was happening found
that especially
among retired people
trust levels were low.
However, trust levels
were especially low
when clients had
not been contacted
by financial advisors
recently either because they
hadn't been contacted
proactively or they
hadn't sought out advice.
The results suggest here
that a proactive element
of FinTech advisory
just like it is
for human advisory
will be important.
Now, the FinTech platforms
that we discussed and
you've heard about or
will hear about in
other lectures or in
your travels and travails,
are not purely human
in orientation by
definition you might say.
Although some might
have bionic approaches,
they don't necessarily
distinguish
themselves by being not tech.
They're by definition tech.
So the question then
arises what do we
know about trust not in humans
as you just heard with respect
to financial advisors but
specifically with
respect to algorithms?
In a fascinating bit
of research published
in the Journal of
Experimental Psychology
and elsewhere, Dietvorst,
Simmons and Massey in a pen
working paper discovered
that people displayed
algorithm aversion
and the article is titled
Algorithm Aversion.
People erroneously avoid
algorithms after seeing them.
In this groundbreaking research,
they found that people prefer
humans over algorithms generally.
That may sound strange in a
FinTech lecture but
it sometimes needs
to be confronted for anyone
who is interested in the space,
who is investing in the space,
who is working in
the space and so on.
They also found that
trust in algorithms is
lower when humans
view them at work.
In other words, before they
see algorithms work
they trust them more
than afterward even
if they're better
than competing
human technologies.
Finally, they found that when
an algorithm was
perceived to make
a mistake it was especially bad.
So in other words, people
like people over algorithms.
When people watch
an algorithm work they
trust it less even if
the algorithm is producing
better results than humans
and then when an algorithm makes
mistakes it's especially bad.
In their study, the authors
focused on predictions of
MBA application success and on
forecast a number of
airline passengers in
the airline industry.
In each case, they asked
participants in
their study to make
forecasts either of application
success or of a number of
airline passengers
and compared that
to quantitative models
that they manipulated.
In their studies of
MBA students performance,
they allowed participants to
witness results of
what they called
humans forecasts and
then forecasts of
student performance
that they described to
participants as
coming from models.
When the forecasts were
described as coming from humans,
they saw no difference in
the selection of participants
to use humans forecasts.
You can see that in study one
because there's
no palpable difference between
a control random oriented
choice selection
and those that saw results
of the humans forecasts.
However, when
participants witnessed
results of forecasts
for models whether
the models were better or
not but even when the models were
better their selection of them
aka their trust of them declined.
You can see the numbers
in the control went from
65 percent and 63 percent based
on the first treatment of
those participants
choosing the next round to
be a statistical model
compared to what
happened after they
actually saw the models
forecast or the models
and humans forecasts.
Same thing is repeated in
study number four which
incorporated their
own forecasts as well
as another human and
perhaps because this might
have been a cooked
MBA student example,
they looked at forecasting
the number of
airline passengers in
the United States a kind of
exterior problem the
same exact results.
When asked to select
a statistical model or
a human model when they
saw the results of
a human's forecasts,
there were just over 50 percent
likely to choose
the statistical model.
However, when they saw
a statistical model they
were more likely to
choose the human forecast
56 percent with
a 41 percent for choosing
a statistical model and
that's also true when
they saw both humans and
statistical model
algorithmic forecasts
when the model outperform humans.
It's an incredibly powerful
result across the board.
More than that, your belief
in advance was a function
of whether you
saw a model or
a statistical algorithm perform
even if again was better.
So your confidence in
advance made a difference.
If you look at the far right
of the graph in front of
you when participants described
themselves as being much more
confident in a model in advance,
they were 82 percent likely
if you will to choose
a model and that
converged across whether
you saw the model perform or
whether you didn't see it.
However, if you were not
confident in advance,
and you saw the model
perform you are significantly
less likely to choose it,
13 percent compared to
39 percent were more confident.
In the other dimension
across confidence,
again, if you were more
confident of the model you're
more likely to choose it.
So how could we bring this
together for FinTech?
Well, number one we see
how important trust
is and the variance of
trust at least in part.
Second, in the FinTech
context we might
translate this notion of trust
into trust of algorithms.
What do we know there?
Algorithmic aversion exists.
People don't choose algorithms
over humans once they see
the algorithm in action
even if the algorithm
beats people.
They may choose the algorithm
if they haven't seen
any results even if those
results are better than theirs.
If algorithms make
mistakes and people see
them they strongly avoid
the use of the algorithm.
Interestingly enough the authors
of the piece we just
mentioned followed on and found
that if they could change
the algorithms let's
say participants if
people can change
the algorithm even
a small bit after
seeing its performance they're
more likely to use the algorithm.
So it looks like in some sense
combining judgment with
the algorithm helped them feel
confident and trusting
of the algorithm itself.
This reflects some pretty
interesting work summarized in
a well-known paper in
science in the late
80's by Dawes, Faust,
and Meehl called Clinical
Versus Actuarial Judgment in
which in a meta-analytic approach
the authors described how
actuarial approaches called them
algorithmic approaches in
many different contexts
beat clinical or
human-oriented approaches
including judging
people's personalities,
making parole
violation predictions,
diagnosing progressive
brain dysfunction,
understanding and diagnosing
Hodgkin's disease,
forecasting college grades,
diagnosing psychological
disorders,
understanding hospitalization
times and numerous others.
The actuarial approach dominated
the clinical approach
although they did find that
the combination of actuarial and
clinical approaches
dominated all the others.
There were several reasons:
consistency or its
converse for humans inconsistency
across time, across scenarios,
across states of mind
of the protagonist.
Actuarial approaches tended to be
more rational and rules-based.
They allowed formal rational
weighting of inputs.
They included all kinds of
relevant variables and
excluded irrelevant variables.
Sample biases of
clinical approaches
are often large in number,
limited samples, skewed exposure
to treated cases.
Doctors for example
see only the sick
as opposed to a controlled
sample and so on.
One area where it was found that
the combination of actuary
clinical approaches
dominated others
was in the area of
what we call the
broken leg problem or
the recognition of
extreme outliers in which
clinicians were shown to
have better predictive
capabilities.
But the idea that
the combination of
humans and machine might
give the best result
is highly supportive of
the FinTech proposition in
some ways especially
as it relates to
trust in algorithms and
ultimate outcome for clients.